## Pragmatic machine learning predictions of pregnancy complications and adverse birth outcomes with routine health data

Cassandra Parent, Charikleia Moraitaki, Amanda Ngo, Mara B Greenberg, Yeyi Zhu*, Marzyeh Ghassemi*
*Co-corresponding

Maternal mortality rates in the United States are higher than any other high-income nation, with a disproportionate burden on marginalized groups who often lack access to specialized care. We investigate the potential for machine learning models to predict pregnancy and birth complications using only routinely obtained health information. Using a population-based cohort of 442,760 pregnancies, we train separate prediction models for each to predict seven pregnancy and birth complications in six-week intervals. We find that pregnancy complications (gestational hypertension, gestational diabetes, and pre-eclampsia) are predictable at early intervention points, including the first trimester, but adverse birth outcomes (preterm birth, stillbirth, small for gestational age, placental abruption) remain difficult to predict even with late pregnancy data. We externally validate our models in an additional cohort of 6,105 pregnancies, and find that models must be locally tuned for optimal performance. These models require only routinely collected clinical data, enabling early risk stratification and cost-effective intervention even in settings that lack access to specialized testing. Our work demonstrates both the potential for, and challenges of, early risk assessment and intervention in personalized perinatal healthcare. 

Note, that the majority of this code is commented out due to its use of private health data. The All of Us code can be run on their platform at https://www.researchallofus.org/. Synthetic data was generated in /data/ to run both Kaiser Permanente Northern California and All of Us notebooks without any data access. This synthetic dataset was independently generated and does not contain, reflect, or rely on Kaiser Permanente Northern California participant data, statistics, or model parameters. The dataset is provided solely to facilitate code execution and reproducibility of the analytical workflow.
  
